

    Home
    Near Me
    Chapters
    Arts & Culture
    Eat & Drink
    Stories
    Society
    Travel
    Heritage
    Vignette
    Darkroom
    Videos
    Podcast

Saigoneer
Menu
Street Cred: Trinh Cong Son, the Voice of a Generation

    Sunday, 13 August 2017. 
    Written by Saigoneer. Illustration by Andy Tran. 

AAA
Earlier this week, Hanoi officials announced the conversion of the capital’s narrow Trinh Cong Son Street into a pedestrian zone featuring artistic performances as well as snacks and souvenirs.

While those plans are now on hold, according to DTI, as local authorities attempt to reach a compromise with local residents who oppose the project’s implementation, the street seems an apt choice for such a space, thanks to its namesake.

Trinh Cong Son is easily Vietnam’s most famous modern songwriter, not to mention its most prolific. Dubbed the “Bob Dylan of Vietnam” by American songstress Joan Baez, Son penned at least 600 songs over his four-decade career, most of them love ballads, in addition to dabbling in painting and poetry.

Though he was born in 1939 in the Central Highlands province of Dak Lak, Son grew up in Hue, attending school there before moving to Saigon to study philosophy at the Jean Jacques Rousseau School. Music was not initially the composer’s career choice, but after a judo accident in 1957 that nearly took his life, an 18-year-old Son found himself bedridden for the better part of two years. The composer would later credit this period as the start of his love affair with music: confined to a bed, he began reading books on philosophy, literature and folk music.

Once he had recovered, Son began composing his first pieces of music, making his debut in 1959 with "Uot Mi", a track performed by singer Thanh Thuy. In the coming years, the composer produced countless songs, often working with singer Khanh Ly, who became one of his long-time collaborators. In the late 1960s, the duo teamed up to perform at a popular student café, Quan Van, and things took off from there. By the time the 1970s rolled round, both Ly and Son were big names in the music industry.

Trinh Cong Son's "Ha Trang" performed by Khanh Ly in 1974. Video via YouTube user ChuongDienKhanh.

Over the following decade, as Vietnam faced great political upheaval, Son continued his work, at times falling out of favor with both sides of the American conflict. Through his music, Son expressed hope for his country’s reunification, an unpopular idea in pre-1975 Saigon; following the end of the war, his music disappeared from the airwaves for some time.

Eventually, however, the overwhelming popularity of Son’s music brought both him and his work back to the forefront. In the 1980s, the composer took a job with the HCMC Music Association and continued creating new music. Son lived a relatively quiet existence for the rest of his life, continuing to work with young artists until his passing in 2001 due to diabetes-related complications. His death was mourned by fans around the world, and the composer was laid to rest in Binh Duong.

To this day, contemporary Vietnamese singers continue to perform their own renditions of Son’s work, keeping the composer’s heartfelt ballads alive.

As for the composer’s namesake street, the opening of its pedestrian zone has been postponed until October, however one thing is clear: a performance space would make a fitting tribute to one of Vietnam’s greatest musicians.
Related Articles:
- Nhạc Vàng: Bridging the Generational Gap With Retro Saigon Tunes
- Saving the City's Soul: The Release of Saigon Supersound, Vol. 1
- Indie Artists Bring New Sounds to Vietnam's Contemporary Music Scene
Saïgon Chợ Lớn Then & Now
Join Group

If you have enjoyed our work and believe that Saigoneer’s voice is an important one to have, please consider supporting us. Pledge any amount you’re comfortable with in the form of a one-time or recurring donation so we can continue bringing you the stories you love to read.
z
Support Saigoneer
Previous article 129-Year-Old Nam Dinh Church Destroyed by Fire
Next article [Photos] The 1920s Students of Hanoi’s Indochina University
Related Articles

Saigoneer in Vietnam
129-Year-Old Nam Dinh Church Destroyed by Fire

On Saturday night, a 129-year-old church in Nam Dinh province caught fire, damaging one of Vietnam’s oldest religious structures.

Saigoneer in Vietnam
1969 My Tho Through the Eyes of an American Serviceman

In 1968, American soldier Lance Nix arrived in Vietnam on his first tour with the US military. While the country was torn apart elsewhere, Nix and his fellow soldiers in the MACV Team 66 stationed in ...

Saigoneer in Vietnam
Archaeologists May Have Found Quang Trung’s Elusive Tomb

Nguyen Dac Xuan is having a good week.

Saigoneer in Vietnam
Check out These Vintage Stamps From French Indochina

In the first half of the 20th century, Indochina's stamps served as a miniature window into the people and places of the former French colony.

Saigoneer in Vietnam
Emperor Bao Dai’s Rolex Just Became the World's Most Expensive Watch

Emperor Bao Dai’s Rolex made history this weekend as the most expensive watch ever sold at auction.

Saigoneer in Vietnam
Hoi An's Great Flood of 1964

Every year, Hoi An's annual floods blanket the riverside streets of the Old Town in a murky, blue-green water, making for plenty of tourist photo opportunities. By this point, local residents are used...
Partner Content

LAVA in Eat & Drink Partner
LAVA: From Ocean’s Bounty to Fire’s Embrace

Amid the tropical beauty of Phú Quốc, where sunsets melt into shades of gold over the sea, a dining destination awaits that is as much about architecture and storytelling as it is about cuisine.

Saigoneer in Hotels
Neighborhood Vibes and Modern Comforts Combine at Hotel Indigo Saigon The City

Staying in a local neighborhood means surrounding yourself with the sights, styles, routines, traditions, and history of a locale. Hotel Indigo Saigon The City, a new boutique lifestyle hotel, tells t...

An Lâm Retreat Saigon River in Hotels
How Corporate Meetings Can “Go Green”

Stepping beyond the confines of four narrow walls to embrace the vastness of nature, creative ideas begin to flow effortlessly.

Saigoneer in Service
Why Golf Might Be the Perfect Pastime to Pick Up in Saigon

"What is there that's fun to do today?" You've probably found yourself asking this of friends and family during weekends in Saigon. Golf might be the exact activity you're looking for.

Saigoneer in Retail
NOPA MOVE: The Bottle That Rewards Re-Use

Sometimes we need a little extra motivation to take what we know is a positive action. This certainly applies to sustainability efforts. We know we should bicycle instead of drive, eat at neighborhood...

Jessi Pham in Eat & Drink Partner
Residence Eleven: A Cantonese Culinary Journey Above Saigon

Floating high above the city on the 39th floor of Hilton Saigon, Residence Eleven is a narrative in space, taste, and memory. As the first Chinese fine-dining venue in a five-star hotel to offer direc...

    Home
    Content Funding
    Support Us
    Contact Us/Advertising
    Copywriting Services
    Contribute
    Jobs
    XPLR
    Events Near Me
    Promotions
    Sponsored Listings
    Event Calendar
    RSS
    Sitemap
    Media Kit

Urbanist Network Logo
 
Saigoneer
Sài·gòn·eer
Saigoneer한글판
Urbanist Travel
Copyright © 2025 Urbanist Network. All Rights Reserved

