Songwriter's 40 Years As 'Heart' of Vietnam

By Jon Lidén, International Herald Tribune

    Oct. 18, 1995

If Ho Chi Minh symbolizes Vietnam's soul, with the determination and steely will power that made it win wars against China, France and the United States, Trinh Cong Son is its heart.

Some of Trinh Cong Son's songs were banned in both North and South Vietnam duringthe war, because they were said to destroy the will to fight.

But ironically, Trinh Cong Sonsucceeded in unifying the country in a way war and politics never were able to. His songs are sung and loved in the North as well as in the South. Even among the millions of exiled Vietnamese,Trinhis embraced as the lyricist who best puts their longing and their memories into words.

"Stop any Vietnamese on the street anywhere in the world, and he or she will be able to recite lines from some of Son's songs," said Ngo Van Tao, a friend and poet who has workedwith him.Thin and frail, sitting with his guitar in front of huge audiences on South Vietnam's university campuses in the 1960s,Trinh Cong Son was nicknamed Vietnam's Bob Dylan. Like Dylan, he told his fans to mistrust leaders, and like Dylan, he has published more than 500 songs and is still writing and singing.

These days, one can most often findhimat Tib, the restaurant in Ho Chi Minh City he owns with her sister whoreturned from exile in Canada to do business in the "new" Vietnam, where business is more important than ideology. Not only are recordings of his songs always played on the restaurant's music system, Trinh Cong Son himself often brings a guitar and sings his songs to the audience of well-to-do Vietnamese, overseas Vietnamese who are back for a visit and foreign businessmen.

Although his new songs arepopular, in the minds of most Vietnamese,he represents the 1960s, as Bob Dylan does for most baby boomers.

"My first boyfriend played this song so beautifully," said a Vietnamese woman editor in Hanoi, breaking off a conversationto listen to aTrinh Cong Son tune on the car stereo.

"He was 16. Then he was drafted to the army and sent down the Ho Chi Minh Trail. He died on the way."

Borninto an affluent family in 1939 in Hue in central Vietnam, Trinh Cong Son received a combination of a traditional French education and a Buddhist Vietnamese one, both dominated by studies of literature and art.
Editors’ Picks
Embrace the Potato Dinner
My Brother Was Dishonorably Discharged. Why Is His Military Portrait Up?
Our 14 Favorite Butternut Squash Recipes

All through his youth, the Vietnamese War for independence from the French was raging. It made him a staunch, though romantic nationalist, but he also quickly learned to hate war. An accident in 1958, which nearly left him paralyzed, made him drop out of his philosophy studies in Saigon and focus on his poetry and songs.

The melancholy and poetic songs were instantly embraced by Vietnamese on both sides of the war that pitched the North and South against each other in the 1960s and early 1970s. Trinh's tales of unrequited love,longing and nationalism were a much needed antidote to the harsh realities of the war.

In an interview,he mused over his 40 years as a chronicler of the Vietnamese'sprivate feelings. "There is so much sadness in Vietnam," he said. "It always has been and it didn't end with the war. It is a country of suffering and the suffering colors the people."

"Trinh Cong Son has been able to give meaning to the suffering all Vietnamese have gone through. He has put words on the apocalyptic experience the war and its aftermath were for all Vietnamese," said his friend, Ngo Van Tao.

Trinh's songs point out the futility of warand theirpacifist message made themdangerous to the warring regimes in the North and the South.

In the past few years, however, the government has embraced Trinh Cong Son, including him in a book of revolutionary artists during the war.

This, and the fact that he stayed in Vietnam while most of the well-knownSouth Vietnamese singers and songwriters,as well as most members of his family, fled the country, have led to accusations from some exiled Vietnamese that he is a Communist.

Asked about this,Trinhreplied that he has never been interested in politics. He said, however, that while he often goes to Canada and the United States to visit family and friends, he rarely performs there, often feeling some hostility fromanti-Communist exiled Vietnamese.

Why stay in Vietnam?

"Vietnam is the only place where I can live and create music," he said. "Abroad, I don't hear the music in my head, I don't hear the poems I write down. I like being abroad, but if I stay away too long, I dry up and die. The warmth of the people in Vietnam is like the water a flower needs to live."