

Wikipedia The Free Encyclopedia

    Donate
    Create account
    Log in

Trịnh Công Sơn

    Article
    Talk

    Read
    Edit
    View history

Tools

Appearance
Text

    Small
    Standard
    Large

Width

    Standard
    Wide

Color (beta)

    Automatic
    Light
    Dark

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
In this Vietnamese name, the surname is Trịnh, but is often simplified to Trinh in English-language text. In accordance with Vietnamese custom, this person should be referred to by the given name, Sơn.
Trịnh Công Sơn
Background information
Birth name	Trịnh Công Sơn
Also known as	Trịnh
Born	February 28, 1939
Origin	Buôn Ma Thuột, Đắk Lắk Province, French Indochina
Died	April 1, 2001 (aged 62)
Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam
Instrument	Guitar
Years active	1958–2001

Trịnh Công Sơn (February 28, 1939 – April 1, 2001) was a Vietnamese musician, songwriter, painter and poet.[1][2] He is widely considered to be Vietnam's best songwriter. His music explores themes of love, loss, and anti-war sentiments during the Vietnam War, for which he was censored by both the southern Republic of Vietnam and the Socialist Republic of Vietnam. Many performing artists, most notably Khánh Ly, Trinh Vinh Trinh (his younger sister), and some overseas singers such as Tuan Ngoc, Le Quyen, Le Thu, and Ngoc Lan, have gained popularity in their own right from covering Sơn's songs.
Biography

Trịnh Công Sơn was born in Buôn Ma Thuột, Đắk Lắk Province, French Indochina, but as a child he lived in the village of Minh Huong in Hương Trà in Thừa Thiên–Huế Province.[3] He grew up in Huế, where he attended the Lycée Français and the Providence school. When he was ten he lived with his father in Huế's Thừa Phủ Prison for a year in 1949.[4] Later he went to Saigon and studied western philosophy at the Lycée Jean-Jacques Rousseau, from which he graduated with the baccalaureate degree. In 1961, he studied psychology and pedagogy in a school for teachers in Qui Nhơn in an attempt to avoid being drafted into the Republic of Vietnam Military Forces. After graduation, he taught at an elementary school in Bao Loc, Lâm Đồng.

Trịnh Công Sơn wrote over 500 songs during the 1960s and 1970s. Sơn was influenced by the shrill demands of American anti-war protesters, which had been brought to Vietnam by none other than young American soldiers."[5] He became one of South Vietnam's notable singer-songwriters, after his first hit, Ướt mi (Tearing Lashes) in 1958. He was frequently under pressure from the government, which was displeased with the pacifist's lyrics of such songs as Ngủ đi con (Lullaby, about a mother grieving for her soldier son).

Before April 30, 1975, Trịnh Công Sơn went on the radio in Saigon to sing the song "Joining Hands/Circle of Unity" ("Nối vòng tay lớn") about the dream of national reconciliation between the North and the South, which he had written in 1968. On the afternoon of April 30, following Dương Văn Minh's proclamation of surrender, Trinh went on the radio to say that the national dream had been realized and that liberation had been achieved.

After the reunification in 1975, the government sent Sơn to "retraining" in a labour camp after his family had fled to Canada. However, government and many officials sent their respects with floral tributes. His often melancholic songs about love and postwar reconciliation earned new acceptance and popularity in later years. Many of his songs have been re-licensed to Vietnamese music companies such as Thúy Nga and Lang Van and sung by other artists.

Two singers who are often associated with Trịnh Công Sơn are Khánh Ly and Hồng Nhung.[6] Khánh Ly helped popularize Trịnh Công Sơn's music in the early years, and they often performed together at South Vietnam University campuses. Later in Sơn's life, singer Hồng Nhung (born 1970) re-popularized his music.[citation needed]

Sơn died on 1 April 2001, 62 years old.[7] Hundreds of thousands of people gathered at his funeral in Ho Chi Minh City, for an ad hoc funeral concert, making it the largest spectacle in Vietnamese history, after the funeral procession of Ho Chi Minh.

On 28 February 2019, Google celebrated what would have been Trịnh Công Sơn's 80th birthday with a Google doodle.[8]
Songs

Till now (2017) according to Nguyễn Đăng Chương, director of the Performing Art department of the ministry of Culture, Sport and Tourism, 70 songs of Trịnh Công Sơn are allowed to be performed in public.[9] The latest song which has just been permitted, is Nối vòng tay lớn, on April 12, 2017.[10]
List of songs

    Bài ca dành cho những xác người (Ballad to the people's corpses), written in the aftermath of the Huế Massacre
    Bên đời hiu quạnh (Alone by life's side)
    Biển nghìn thu ở lại
    Biển nhớ (The sea remembers)
    Biển sáng (Bright sea) (co-writing with Phạm Trọng Cầu)
    Biết đâu nguồn cội (Unbeknownst to me, the root)
    Bống bồng ơi
    Bống không là Bống
    Bốn mùa thay lá (Four seasons of change)
    Ca dao mẹ (A folk song for mothers)
    Cánh đồng hoà bình (The Field of peace)
    Cát bụi (Sand and dust)
    Chiếc lá thu phai (The withering fall leaf)
    Chiều một mình qua phố (An afternoon promenade of solitude)
    Chiều trên quê hương tôi (An afternoon in my homeland)
    Chỉ có ta trong cuộc đời (Only me in life)
    Chìm dưới cơn mưa (Sunk under the rain)
    Chính Chúng Ta Phải Nói (We ourselves have to say)
    Cho đời chút ơn (Grace onto life)
    Cho một người nằm xuống (Song for the fallen)
    Chờ nhìn quê hương sáng chói (Wait to see homeland brighten up)
    Chưa mất niềm tin (Still believing)
    Chưa mòn giấc mơ (A dream that hasn't been eroded)
    Con mắt còn lại (The remaining eye)
    Có một dòng sông đã qua đời (A river that has passed away)
    Có nghe đời nghiêng (Tilting life)
    Còn ai với ai / Còn tôi với ai
    Còn mãi tìm nhau (Forever seeking each other)
    Còn có bao ngày (Not many days are left)
    Còn thấy mặt người (Still seeing your face)
    Còn tuổi nào cho em (what time and age for you ?)
    Cỏ xót xa đưa (Sway sorrow weeds)
    Cúi xuống thật gần (Stoop down really close)
    Cũng sẽ chìm trôi (Eventual withering)
    Cuối cùng cho một tình yêu (The end of a romance)
    Dân ta phải sống (Our people must live)
    Dấu chân địa đàng / Tiếng hát dạ lan (Footprints in Eden / The singing of the Hyacinth)
    Diễm xưa (Diễm of the Past)
    Du mục (Nomad)
    Dựng lại người, dựng lại nhà (Rebuild people, rebuild homes)
    Đại bác ru đêm (A Lullaby of Cannons)
    Để gió cuốn đi (Let go with the wind)
    Đêm / Đêm Hồng (Night / Pink Night)
    Đêm bây giờ, đêm mai (This night, tomorrow night)
    Đêm thấy ta là thác đổ (One night I saw me as a waterfall)
    Đi mãi trên đường (Never-ending walk on the road)
    Đóa hoa vô thường (Evanescent bloom)
    Đoản khúc thu Hà Nội (Ditty for Hanoi's autumn)
    Đời cho ta thế (That's what life gives me)
    Đợi có một ngày (Waiting for a day)
    Đôi mắt nào mở ra (which eyes will open)
    Đồng dao hoà bình (The rhythm of Peace)
    Đừng mong ai, đừng nghi ngại (Don't expect or suspect anyone)
    Em còn nhớ hay em đã quên (Do you still remember or have you forgotten?)
    Em đã cho tôi bầu trời (The heaven you have brought to me)
    Em đến từ nghìn xưa (You've come from thousand years ago)
    Em đi bỏ lại con đường (You've gone, leaving the street behind)
    Em đi trong chiều (In the evening you walk)
    Em hãy ngủ đi (Sleep, My Dear)
    Em là hoa hồng nhỏ (You are a little rose)
    Gần như niềm tuyệt vọng (A resemblance of despair)
    Gia tài của mẹ (A mother's legacy)
    Giọt lệ thiên thu (A tear of eternity)
    Giọt nước mắt cho quê hương (A tear for my homeland)
    Gọi tên bốn mùa (Conjure up the four seasons)
    Góp lá mùa xuân (Contributing leaves to Spring)
    Hạ trắng (White summer).
    Hai mươi mùa nắng lạ (Twenty seasons of strange sunlight)
    Hành ca (Marching song)
    Hành hương trên đồi cao / Người đi hành hương trên đỉnh cao (Pilgrimage)
    Hát trên những xác người (Singing over the corpses), not to be confused with "Bài ca dành cho những xác người"
    Hãy cố chờ (Let's try to wait)
    Hãy cứ vui như mọi ngày (Just be happy like any other day)
    Hãy đi cùng nhau (Let's go together)
    Hãy khóc đi em (Just cry, my dear)
    Hãy nhìn lại (Just look back and see)
    Hãy sống giùm tôi (Just live my life for me)
    Hãy yêu nhau đi (Let's love)
    Hoà bình là cơm áo (Peace is life)
    Hoa vàng mấy độ (The flowers that were once golden bright)
    Hoa xuân ca (Spring flowers song)
    Hôm nay tôi nghe (Today I hear)
    Huế - Sài Gòn - Hà Nội (Hue - Saigon - Hanoi)
    Huyền thoại mẹ (The Legend of a mother)
    Khói trời mênh mông
    Lại gần với nhau (Come closer together)
    Lặng lẽ nơi này (So silent here)
    Lời buồn thánh (A holy, sad lyrics)
    Lời mẹ ru (A mother's lullaby)
    Lời ở phố về
    Lời ru đêm (Night's lullaby)
    Lời thiên thu gọi (Eternity's calling)
    Mẹ bỏ con đi / Đường xa vạn dặm
    Môi hồng đào (Rosy Lips)
    Mỗi ngày tôi chọn một niềm vui (Each day I choose one joyful thing)
    Một buổi sáng mùa xuân (A spring morning)
    Một cõi đi về (A place for leaving and returning)
    Một lần thoáng có
    Một ngày như mọi ngày (A day just like any other day)
    Một ngày vinh quang (A day of glory)
    Mùa áo quan (The season of coffins)
    Mùa hè đến (The summer's arrived)
    Mưa hồng (Pink rain)
    Mùa phục hồi / Xin chờ những sớm mai (The season of recuperation / Waiting for tomorrow mornings)
    Nắng thuỷ tinh (Crystal sunlight)
    Này em cớ nhớ (Do you remember?)
    Ngẫu nhiên (Perchance)
    Ngày dài trên quê hương (A long day in the Motherland)
    Ngày mai đây bình yên (Peaceful future)
    Ngày về (Returning home)
    Ngày xưa khi còn bé (Childhood days)
    Nghe những tàn phai (The sound of evanescing)
    Nghe tiếng muôn trùng (Hearing the sound of eternity)
    Ngủ đi con (Sleep, my child)
    Ngụ ngôn mùa đông (A winter fable)
    Người con gái Việt Nam da vàng (A yellow-skinned Vietnamese girl)
    Người già em bé (An old person, a baby)
    Người về bỗng nhớ
    Nguyệt ca (The lunar song)
    Nhìn những mùa thu đi (Watch the autumns passing by)
    Nhớ mùa thu Hà Nội (Missing Hanoi's autumn)
    Như cánh vạc bay (As a flying crane)
    Như chim ưu phiền (As an anguishing bird)
    Như một lời chia tay (As a good-bye)
    Như một vết thương (As a wound)
    Như tiếng thở dài (As a deep sigh)
    Những con mắt trần gian (The earthly eyes)
    Những giọt máu trổ bông (The blooming of the blood drops)
    Níu tay nghìn trùng (Grabbing hands over a thousand miles)
    Nối vòng tay lớn (Grand circle of unity)
    Ở trọ / Cõi tạm (Temporary stay)
    Phôi pha (Withering)
    Phúc âm buồn (Dolorous Gospel)
    Quê hương đau nặng (Motherland in severe illness)
    Quỳnh hương (Scent of the ephemeral bloom)
    Ra đồng giữa ngọ
    Rồi như đá ngây ngô (Not gone at all)
    Rơi lệ ru người
    Ru đời đã mất (Lullaby for a lost life)
    Ru đời đi nhé (Lullaby to life)
    Ru em (Lullaby for you)
    Ru em từng ngón xuân nồng
    Ru ta ngậm ngùi (Lullaby for a sorrowful me)
    Ru tình (Lullaby for love)
    Rừng xưa đã khép (Your old woods are closed)
    Sao mắt mẹ chưa vui?
    Sẽ còn ai (Who will remain?)
    Sóng về đâu (To where the waves depart)
    Ta đi dựng cờ
    Tạ ơn (Thanks)
    Ta phải thấy mặt trời (We must see the Sun)
    Ta quyết phải sống (We must live)
    Ta đã thấy gì trong đêm nay (What have we seen tonight?)
    Thành phố mùa xuân (City in Spring)
    Thuở Bống là người (When Bong was a human)
    Thiên sứ bâng khuâng (thơ Trịnh Cung)
    Thương một người (Loving someone)
    Tiến thoái lưỡng nan (The dilemma)
    Tình ca của người mất trí ("Ballad of an insane person" or "Love song of a deranged woman")
    Tiếng ve gọi hè
    Tình khúc Ơ-bai
    Tình nhớ (Missing love)
    Tình sầu (Sorrowful love)
    Tình xa (Distant love)
    Tình xót xa vừa
    Tình yêu tìm thấy
    Tôi đã mất (I have lost)
    Tôi đang lắng nghe / Im lặng thở dài (I am listening / Quiet sigh)
    Tôi ơi đừng tuyệt vọng (Despair not, dear me)
    Tôi ru em ngủ (I sing you to sleep)
    Tôi sẽ đi thăm (I shall visit)
    Tôi sẽ nhớ (I shall remember)
    Tôi tìm tôi / Tôi là ai? (I search for myself / Who am I?)
    Trong nỗi đau tình cờ
    Tự tình khúc
    Từng ngày qua (Everyday through)
    Tuổi đá buồn (Stone's age of despair)
    Tuổi đời mênh mông
    Tuổi trẻ Việt Nam (Vietnamese Youths)
    Tưởng rằng đã quên (Thought that I have forgotten)
    Ướt mi ("Misty eyes" or "Tearing lashes")
    Vẫn có em bên đời (I still have you in my life)
    Vẫn nhớ cuộc đời
    Vàng phai trước ngõ
    Về trong suối nguồn (Back to the fountainhead)
    Về thăm mái trường xưa (Revisiting the old school)
    Vết lăn trầm
    Vì tôi cần thấy em yêu đời
    Vườn xưa (Garden of the past)
    Xa dấu mặt trời (Far from the sun)
    Xanh lòng phai tàn
    Xin cho tôi (Please give me)
    Xin hãy dừng tay (Please stop)
    Xin mặt trời ngủ yên (Please let the sun sleep)
    Xin trả nợ người
    Yêu dấu tan theo (Fading love)

Songs about the Vietnam War

In the song "Mother's Legacy" (Gia tài của mẹ), Sơn sings about the Vietnamese experience of the Vietnam War:[11] He laments that the 1,000 years of Vietnam's subjugation to Chinese imperial rule, the 100 years of subjugation to French colonial rule, and the ongoing civil war, together have left a sad legacy of graveyards, parched fields and burning houses. He urges the children of Vietnam to remain true to their Vietnamese identity and overcome the dividing hatred, put an end to internecine fighting and the destruction of the country.

In the song "Song about the Corpses of People" ("Hát trên những xác người"), written in the aftermath of the Huế Massacre, Sơn sings about the corpses strewn around the city, in the river, on the roads, on the rooftops, even on the porches of the pagodas. The corpses, each one of which he regards as the body of a sibling, will nourish the farmland.

A rock music concert event titled Nối Vòng Tay Lớn ("The Great Circle of Vietnam"); the name of a popular patriotic anti-war song by Trịnh Công Sơn, was officially promoted and held in Hồ Chí Minh City ostensibly as a memorial to Sơn, and featuring various Vietnamese rock bands and artists, had officially taken place for the first time on 22 April 2022.[12][13][14]
Love songs

Love is the single biggest recurring theme in Sơn's work. His love songs constitute the majority of the songs. Most of them are sad, conveying a sense of despondence and solitude as in "Sương đêm", "Ướt mi". Songs are either about loss as in "Diểm xưa", "Biển nhớ", or nostalgia: "Tình xa", "Tình sầu", "Tình nhớ", "Em còn nhớ hay em đã quên", "Hoa vàng mấy độ". Other songs, additionally carry philosophical messages from a man to his lover: "Cỏ xót xa đưa", "Gọi tên bốn mùa", "Mưa hồng". The style is sly, simple, suitable to be rendered in Slow, Blues or Boston. The lyrics are overwhelmingly poetic, candid and yet deeply poignant, oftentimes hinting elements of symbolism and surrealism.
References

Dale Alan Olsen Popular Music of Vietnam: The Politics of Remembering 2008 "Trịnh Công Sơn" biography p134-135, ideology p129-130 influence on musicians p139-140
Shepherd Continuum encyclopedia of popular music of the world 2005 p.228 "Trịnh Công Sơn""Trinh Cong Son's love songs hit Hue palace". Tuoi Tre. 2011-03-30. Archived from the original on April 2, 2011.
Schafer, John C., "The Trịnh Công Sơn Phenomenon", The Journal of Asian Studies, Volume 66, Issue 3, 2007, ISSN 0067-7159
Death, Buddhism, and Existentialism in the Songs of Trịnh Công Sơn JC Schafer - 2007 "... His father, active in the resistance, was imprisoned in Buôn Ma Thuột, and Trịnh Công Sơn lived with him in Thừa Phủ Prison for a year in 1949 when he was ten years old."
Nghia M. Vo Saigon: A History 2011- Page 137 "Trịnh Công Sơn in "Who's Left Who Is Vietnamese" advised combatants to open their eyes, for there were only Vietnamese fighters around and by that time one million of them had died during the war. Turn over the human corpses, the lyrics said, and one could only see Vietnamese faces. "
Schafer, John (2023). Trịnh Công Sơn and Bob Dylan: Essays on War, Love, Songwriting and Religion. Arcata, CA: The Press at Cal Poly Humboldt. p. 152. ISBN 978-1-962081-05-4.
"Vietnamese Songwriter Trinh Cong Son Dies". The Washington Post. 3 April 2001. Retrieved 19 February 2023.
"Trịnh Công Sơn's 80th Birthday". Google. Retrieved 2019-03-02.
'Mọi người hát bài Nối vòng tay lớn đều chưa xin phép', tuoitre.vn, 11.04.2017
Cục Nghệ thuật biểu diễn vừa cấp phép ca khúc 'Nối vòng tay lớn', thanhnien.vn, 12.04.2017
The original Vietnamese text and various English translations are available on numerous internet websites including the following: [1], "Gia tài của mẹ — Trinh Cong Son". Archived from the original on 2012-04-25. Retrieved 2011-08-10., [2], "Southeast Asian Folksong Page". Archived from the original on 2011-07-28. Retrieved 2011-08-10..
Administrator (2022-05-06). "Vietnamese rock show attracts hundreds of spectators in downtown Ho Chi Minh City". Vietexplorer.com. Retrieved 2022-08-16.
Times, Vietnam (2021-09-15). "Famous Vietnamese Song "Nối Vòng Tay Lớn - Great Circle of Vietnam" Sung By An Expat". Vietnam Times. Retrieved 2022-08-16.

    "Popular Vietnamese Song Again Permitted in Public". VOA. Retrieved 2022-08-16.

External links

    BBC News article on Trịnh Công Sơn's funeral
    A tribute to Trịnh Công Sơn
    An extensive site on Trịnh Công Sơn, including most of his songs, writings, and articles about him
    Trịnh Công Sơn songs on writeopenstory, with links to many Vietnamese songs on him

Authority control databases Edit this at Wikidata
International	

    ISNIVIAFGNDFASTWorldCat

National	

    United StatesFranceBnF dataJapanCzech Republic

Academics	

    CiNii

Artists	

    MusicBrainz

People	

    Trove

Other	

    IdRefSNAC

Categories:

    1939 births2001 deathsVietnamese composersPeople from Đắk Lắk provincePeople from HuếVietnamese songwritersVietnamese musicians

    This page was last edited on 15 September 2025, at 14:59 (UTC).
    Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.

    Privacy policy
    About Wikipedia
    Disclaimers
    Contact Wikipedia
    Code of Conduct
    Developers
    Statistics
    Cookie statement
    Mobile view

    Wikimedia Foundation
    Powered by MediaWiki

