Joseph Robinette Biden Jr. (born November 20, 1942) is an American politician who was the 46th president of the United States from 2021 to 2025. A member of the Democratic Party, he served as the 47th vice president from 2009 to 2017 under President Barack Obama, and represented Delaware in the U.S. Senate from 1973 to 2009. Born in Scranton, Pennsylvania, Biden graduated from the University of Delaware in 1965 and the Syracuse University College of Law in 1968. He was elected to the New Castle County Council in 1970 and the U.S. Senate in 1972. As a senator, Biden chaired the Senate Judiciary Committee and Foreign Relations Committee. He drafted and led passage of the Violent Crime Control and Law Enforcement Act and the Violence Against Women Act. He also oversaw six U.S. Supreme Court confirmation hearings, including contentious hearings for Robert Bork and Clarence Thomas. He opposed the Gulf War in 1991 but voted in favor of the Iraq War Resolution in 2002. Biden ran unsuccessfully for the 1988 and 2008 Democratic presidential nominations. In 2008, Obama chose Biden as his running mate, and he was a close counselor to Obama as vice president. In the 2020 presidential election, Biden selected Kamala Harris as his running mate, and they defeated Republican incumbents Donald Trump and Mike Pence. He became the first president with a woman vice president. As president, Biden signed the American Rescue Plan Act, Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act, CHIPS and Science Act, and Inflation Reduction Act in response to the COVID-19 pandemic and subsequent recession. He appointed Ketanji Brown Jackson to the Supreme Court of the United States. In his foreign policy, the U.S. reentered the Paris Agreement. Biden oversaw the complete withdrawal of U.S. troops that ended the war in Afghanistan, leading to the Taliban seizing control. He responded to the Russian invasion of Ukraine by imposing sanctions on Russia and authorizing aid to Ukraine. During the Gaza war, Biden condemned the actions of Hamas as terrorism, strongly supported Israel's military efforts, and sent limited[citation needed] humanitarian aid to the Gaza Strip. A temporary ceasefire proposal he backed was adopted shortly before he left office. Concerns about Biden's age and health persisted throughout his term. He became the first president to turn 80 while in office. He began his presidency with majority support, but saw his approval ratings decline significantly throughout his presidency, in part due to public frustration over inflation, which peaked at 9.1% in June 2022 but dropped to 2.9% by the end of his presidency. Biden initially ran for reelection and, after the Democratic primaries, became the party's presumptive nominee in the 2024 presidential election. After his performance in the first presidential debate, renewed scrutiny from across the political spectrum about his cognitive ability led him to withdraw his candidacy. Biden's administration is ranked favorably by historians and scholars, diverging from public assessments of his tenure. He is the oldest living former U.S. president.
Biography

Joseph Robinette Biden, Jr. was born on November 20, 1942, in Scranton, Pennsylvania. In 1953, the Biden family moved from Pennsylvania to Delaware. Joe Biden graduated from the University of Delaware and Syracuse Law School and served on the New Castle County Council. In 1972, at the age of 29, he was elected to the United States Senate.

Just weeks after the election, tragedy struck the Biden family. Biden's wife, Neilia, and their one-year-old daughter, Naomi, were killed and their two young sons, Joseph “Beau” III and Hunter, critically injured in a car accident. Biden took the Senate oath of office at the hospital and began commuting to Washington every day by train, a practice he maintained throughout his career in the Senate.

In 1977, Biden married Jill Jacobs. Jill Biden, who holds a doctorate (Ed.D.) in Education, has worked as an educator for over two decades. The Bidens raised three children: Beau, Hunter, and Ashley. In 2015, Beau Biden passed away from brain cancer.

As Chairman or Ranking Member of the Senate Judiciary Committee for 17 years, Biden was recognized for his work on criminal justice issues, including the landmark 1994 Crime Act and the Violence Against Women Act. As Chairman or Ranking Member of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee for 12 years, Biden played a pivotal role in shaping U.S. foreign policy. Biden served 36 years in the United States Senate.

In 2008, Barack Obama chose Joe Biden as his running mate. Biden served as Vice President of the United States from 2009 to 2017. As vice president, he implemented the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act, advised President Obama on key foreign policy decisions, led several initiatives to reduce violence against women, and initiated the “Cancer Moonshot” program. On January 12, 2017, President Obama awarded Biden the Presidential Medal of Freedom for his decades of public service.

In 2020, Joe Biden defeated incumbent Donald Trump to become the 46th President of the United States. Biden is the oldest person to take the oath of office (78), the first president from Delaware, and the second Roman Catholic president in United States history (the first was John F. Kennedy).

During the campaign, Biden selected Kamala Harris as his running mate. Harris is the first woman, first African American, and first person of South Asian heritage to serve as Vice President of the United States. 